# Controller-based REST APIs

**TO DECIDE:**
**- Confirm that the setup is the same for controller-based and minimal APIs, and extract the setting up section.**
**- Depending on how long this section ends up to be, create file for setting up and guidelines.**
**- Check whether we should keep version control package references.**

## Introduction

Controller-based APIs follow the traditional ASP.NET Core MVC pattern, where routes and metadata are defined using attributes on controllers and actions. Swashbuckle integrates seamlessly with this style, offering robust support for:

- Automatic OpenAPI documentation generation
- API versioning support
- Enrichment through XML comments and annotations

This section demonstrates how to configure Swashbuckle in a project that uses controller-based APIs and versioning, and how to document endpoints using standard practices.

### The *ControllerBasedRestApi* repository

The repository [ControllerBasedRestApi](**ADD LINK**) is an integral part of this tutorial. In it you can find a working example of a C# repository taking advantage of Swashbuckle to generate API documentation.
It is a very simple example, with the single purpose of exemplifying how to use the documentation generation tool.
In it you will find the following components relevant for the API documentation:

- `Controllers/ForecastController`: contains the endpoints that compose the API. It is sectioned in regions, where each regions represents a topic relevant for the API documentation, and present in the [API Guidelines](https://gitlab.prod.sgre.one/devsecops/api-governance/api-guidelines).
- `Extensions/AuthorizationServiceExtensions`, `Extensions/IdentityServerServiceExtensions` and `IdentityServerConfig`: contain authorization-related information, relevant for the definition of the API, and some of which will be present in the API documentation.
- `Extensions/SwaggerServiceExtensions`: contains configurations relevant for Swashbuckle and Swagger UI. It includes adding the support for the coexistence of multiple API versions, and enabling the annotations provided by the package `Swashbuckle.AspNetCore.Annotations`.
- `Program.cs`: relevant for the documentation, there are the following regions:
  - `Setup for Rate Limiting`: this is necessary to setup rate limiting in the repository, and it is relevant for the documentation in the sense that the rate limitings you configure in your code, will be reflected in the documentation and Swagger UI.
  - `Setup for Authentication, Authorization, and IdentityServer`: necessary to setup authentication and authorization in the repository, which will be reflected in the documentation and when interacting with Swagger UI.
  - `Setup for API Specification`: this adds to the application the extension methods defined at `Extensions/SwaggerServiceExtensions`, with the first part of the setup for Swashhbuckle and Swagger UI.
  - `API Versioning`: this region adds the necessary configurations to work with different versions of an API. In particular, it adds:
    - Support to 3 different approaches in terms of how the version number is represented: in the API URL, as a query parameter, ans as a header. In your repository, you only have to follow one of these approaches. **ToDo: Do the guidelines refer which approach to follow? Say it here, or just refer that each approach has advantges and disadvantages, but that that is outside of the scope of the tutorial.**
    - A default version, meaning that, unless you indicate otherwise in your endpoints, all of them will be considered as part of this version.
    - The format of the version name, e.g., `v3`.
  - `Middleware Configuration`: this region includes the final steps in setting up Swashbuckle and Swagger UI for the development environment. These steps enabled the visualization of the API documentation files (yaml/json) in the browser, in the URL defined for Swagger, as well as interacting with the documentation in the browser, thus being able to test the endpoints during the development phase.
  - `keys/is-signing-key-<GUID>.json`: stores the cryptographic signing key used by IdentityServer for issuing secure tokens. This file is automatically generated and managed by IdentityServer, and is essential for enabling secure authentication and authorization flows in the API. (It should be protected and not shared outside trusted environments)
  - `appsettings.json`: holds the main configuration settings for the API, including logging levels, allowed hosts, and rate limiting rules. This file centralizes application settings, making it easy to adjust operational parameters such as rate limits, authentication options, and other environment-specific values without changing the code.
  - `MyApi.csproj`: defines the project structure and dependencies for the API. This file lists all NuGet packages required for features such as API versioning, rate limiting, authentication, and OpenAPI/Swagger documentation. It also includes build settings like the target .NET version and enabling XML documentation, which is important for generating enriched API docs with Swashbuckle.

  **ToDo:Is the auth part really working in the UI? From what I recall, no. Consider removing this from Program.cs?**
  **ToDo:Confirm that all this is applicable also in Backstage.**
  **ToDo:Add somewhere that the setting up of Swashbuckle and Swagger UI is done in several locations, and which are relevant for what, and which can be skipped. Check the following note ↓**

  **Note:**
The setup of Swashbuckle and Swagger UI is distributed across several files in this repository, each with a specific role in the documentation process:

  - The main configuration for Swagger and API documentation generation is located in `Extensions/SwaggerServiceExtensions`. This section explains how to enable support for multiple API versions, add annotations, and configure security settings.
  - The integration of these configurations into the application takes place in `Program.cs`, specifically within the regions labeled `Setup for API Specification` and `Middleware Configuration`. These sections enable Swagger and Swagger UI at runtime, making the documentation accessible through the browser.
  - Additional documentation enrichment is configured in the project file `<AppName>.csproj`. This includes enabling XML comments for controllers and models to enhance the generated documentation.

## Setup and Run Swashbuckle

### Install Swashbuckle and other required packages

1. In your API project, install the required packages via the CLI:

```bash
# Swashbuckle
dotnet add package Swashbuckle.AspNetCore

# Code annotations - required for controller-based APIs
dotnet add package Swashbuckle.AspNetCore.Annotations

# Versioning
# Provides libraries and middleware for API versioning
dotnet add package Asp.Versioning.Http
# Extends API versioning support and integrates with API documentation tools like Swagger
dotnet add package Asp.Versioning.Mvc.ApiExplorer

# OpenAPI/Swagger capabilities
dotnet add package Microsoft.AspNetCore.OpenApi
```

2. Confirm that the packages were added to your `<AppName>.csproj`.

### Purpose of Installing Swagger UI
Swagger UI offers an interactive, browser-based interface for API documentation.
Enabling Swagger UI in a project improves visibility, collaboration, and maintainability of APIs by:

  - Providing a clear overview of all available API endpoints, including parameters, request and response formats, and authentication requirements.

  - Allowing endpoints to be tested directly in the browser, streamlining development workflows and supporting faster debugging and onboarding.

  - Ensuring that documentation remains aligned with the implementation, as Swagger UI renders the OpenAPI specification directly from the codebase.

  - Centralizing API information in a single, accessible source, reducing ambiguity and improving communication across teams.

Swagger UI transforms static API definitions into an interactive and easily navigable interface, improving both usability and long-term maintainability.

### Configure Swagger

1. To configure and register Swagger in your application:

- Add the contents of `SwaggerServiceExtension.AddCustomSwagger()` to your repository
- Integrate these extensions into your application as shown in section `API Specification Setup` of `Program.cs`

2. To develop and test the API documentation, enable Swagger and he Swagger UI in the development environment, as shown in section `Middleware Configuration` of `Program.cs`.
In this secttion you can see that an URL is being defined to show the API specification files, both in yaml and json format.

### Enable XML Comments for Endpoint Documentation

To enable XML comments in your application, add the following line to the `PropertyGroup` section of your `<AppName>.csproj`: `<GenerateDocumentationFile>true</GenerateDocumentationFile>`.

### Test Documentation Generation

At this point, you should be able to run your application and generate an API document following the OpenAPI specification, with a minimum of information, based on the code in your repository.

After running your application, go to `http://localhost:5000/swagger/index.html` (if needed, adjust to the port selected for the application), and check in the Swagger UI the content currently in yout API specification file.

To check the content of you actual specification files, go to `http://localhost:5000/swagger/v1/swagger.yaml` for the yaml file and to `http://localhost:5000/swagger/v1/swagger.json` for the json file (as before, adjust the port if needed).

### Integrate with Backstage

To see your new API documentation in Backstage, follow the instructions in section [Integration with Backstage](Backstage.md#backstage).

## Swashbuckle and the API Guidelines

This section describes how to use Swashbuckle to extend your current API documentation, so that it complies with your company's [API guidelines](https://gitlab.prod.sgre.one/devsecops/api-governance/api-guidelines), generating clear, interactive, and well-structured API documentation.

[Rest Guidelines](RestGuidelines.md)
To keep the explanation simple and focused, we will cover each guideline, highlighting how Swashbuckle (always referring to the accompanying repository), can help.
